---
layout: post
title: "Managing Dotfiles With Git"
date: 2012-10-27 22:30
comments: true
categories: [git, dotfiles]
---
###All the cool kids are doing it.

As a Linux user, one of the great things is how much everything on the system
can be customized exactly to your liking, and how easy it is to do so through
(usually) simple plain-text config files. One not-so-great thing is having to
copy those files around whenever you get access to a new machine and want all
your nice customizations on there too, or even worse, loosing all those careful
tweaks in a system reinstall.

Fortunately there is a better way. By using git to manage all your
configuration files ("dotfiles", since they are usually prefixed with a `.`),
you can store all your settings remotely and easily sync them across any number
of computers. Even if you're fairly new to Linux and don't have much in the way
of dotfiles, keeping whatever you do have in git is still a good idea because 1)
Even if you don't have a lot now, you will eventually so might as well start
early, and 2) No matter how little configuration you might have, having to
retype it after a system reinstall is never fun, so keeping it in a safe place
just makes sense. So with that in mind, lets get started.

<!-- more -->

Before we start, I'm assuming you have git installed and a github account ready to
go. If not, then you should register for a free account
[here](https://github.com/signup/free). It's a great website for hosting your
git repos, and if you're a student you can even get a few free private repos to
store all your secrets. Once you create an account, just run through the super
easy instructions to get git set up on your machine.

To get started, go to your github and create a new repo name *dotfiles*, and
clone it to your local machine. Now to start out, lets just add one file to the
repo. If you have a bashrc, then I'd recommend starting with that. Copy the file
`.bashrc` from your home directory to `dotfiles/bashrc`. I'm omitting the `.`
on purpose in the repo, because having it hidden in a repository used for
nothing but dotfiles doesn't make much sense. Once it's there you can add to the
repo with `git add bashrc` and `git commit -m `adding bashrc.`. Finally, push
the changes to github to access your bashrc from anywhere with an internet
connection.

So now you can take any other configuration files you have, add them to the
repo, and pull them down to any other computers you use. Of course, now you have
to copy all your files back into your home directory each time you pull down new
changes. That, or you could use a shell script to create symlinks for each
file so that whenever you run `git pull` you don't have to do any extra work.
Just copy or download the following script into a file called `link.sh`, make it executable,
and add it to the repo. Then whenever you add new files, just run `./link.sh`
inside the repo to create matching symlinks in your home directory.

{% include_code Create Dotfiles Symlinks dots-pt1/link.sh %}
