---
layout: post
title: "Raspberry Pi In The Dorm"
date: 2013-02-18 12:00
comments: true
categories: [Raspberry Pi, College, Dorm, SSH]
---
##Using a Raspberry Pi single board computer as a dorm room command center.

Some time ago I bought a [Raspberry Pi](http://www.raspberrypi.org/), and once
the initial excitement of setting up the new system wore off, I realized that I
had absolutely no plans thought out on what to use it for. Well rather than let
such an interesting new device go to waste, I set about thinking of things I
might want to implement on my dorm network, and eventually digging through my
spare parts bin to see what unused electronics I might be able to use in the
projects. Listed in this post are my three favorite uses that I came up with for
the Pi on my dorm network, and instructions on how to implement them yourself.

<!--more-->

---

<a id="top"></a>
**Warning!** This is a long post. For your convenience here are some links to
jump by section:

1. [Reverse SSH Tunnel](#tunnel)
2. [Networked Attached Storage](#nas)
3. [Deluge Torrent Daemon](#deluge)

---
<br />

###<a id="tunnel"></a>Bypass Dorm NAT With a Reverse SSH Tunnel
The first thing I wanted to do was setup a way to access the Pi via SSH from
outside my dorm, which presented the first problem: all the IP addresses in my
dorm (and indeed most dorms) are behind a
[NAT](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_address_translation) system. For
anyone who isn't familiar with this, the short explanation is that all the
connections inside the dorm share the same external IP address, and as a
consequence of this I couldn't just forward port 22 to my Pi. Fortunately, this
problem can be easily solved with a small script and some SSH magic.

In order to carry out this fix, you'll need access to an external server that you
are already able to SSH into. In many cases, you could already have this through
your school, such as in my case where I had SSH access to both several machines
in the computer science computer lab, and the campus email server. If you check
and determine that your school does not provide any SSH access, I'd recommend
watching [Low End Box](http://www.lowendbox.com/) and renting the cheapest VPS
you can find. We don't need anything powerful, it's essentially just going to
act as a proxy.

Once you determine the server you'll use to act as a proxy, the next step is to
enable public key access so that we can automate the connection later. Since
we'll need the privte key to be unencrypted, you should generate new
public/private key pair specifcally for this purpose (because I know everyone
reading this practices good security and would normally put a passphrase on
their private key, right? ಠ\_ಠ). For our purposes, lets name this new key
`tun_rsa`:

```console bash
you@raspberrypi: ~$ ssh-keygen
Generating public/private rsa key pair.
Enter file in which to save the key (/home/you/.ssh/id_rsa): /home/you/.ssh/tun_rsa
Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase):
Enter same passphrase again:
Your identification has been saved in /home/you/.ssh/tun_rsa.
Your public key has been saved in /home/you/.ssh/tun_rsa.pub.
The key fingerprint is:
cd:d5:12:84:a8:7c:4e:ff:e0:e2:af:fa:4a:02:1a:ad you@raspberrypi
The key's randomart image is:
+--[ RSA 2048]----+
|         . oo    |
|        . .  o   |
|     . .    o .  |
| .    o oo . .   |
|. o    +S.o      |
| + .    . o      |
|E   . .  . o     |
|     o  . . .    |
|      o=++.      |
+-----------------+
```
Now, install the key on the proxy server with `ssh-copy-id -i .ssh/tun\_rsa.pub
you@proxy`. For security, you should also add the commands
`command="/bin/false",no-pty` in front of the key entry in authorized_keys on
the proxy server, like so (key shortened for readability):

``` text ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
command="/bin/false",no-pty ssh-rsa AAAAB3Nz...GCBNc6P you@raspberrypi
```

This will prevent us from executing any commands on the server when logging in
with this key, but still allow us to create the reverse tunnel we're working
towards.

You should also add the following line to your ssh config file on the proxy
server to prevent SSH from yelling at you for unrecognized keys:

```text ~/.ssh/config
Host localhost
	StrictHostKeyChecking no
	UserKnownHostsFile /dev/null
```

We're almost there, all that's left is a dependency and the shell script.
Install the package `autossh` on your Pi with `sudo apt-get update && sudo
apt-get install autossh`. This is a nifty little program that will attempt to
restart your ssh connections if they die. Last, copy the following shell script
into the directory `/etc/network/if-up.d` and make it executable.

{% include_code Reverse SSH Tunnel rpi-dorm/reverse_tun.sh %}

Change the variables at the top of the file to match your information. For the
port number, you can choose anything above 1024 (only root can allocate ports
below that), but I'd recommend choosing something above ten thousand, especially
if you are using a university computer that others have access to as your proxy.
That way there is less chance of someone else trying to use the same port.

So now we have set up the Raspberry Pi to automatically create a reverse SSH
tunnel whenever it connects to the internet. How we are able to utilize it
depends on what type of machine you were able to use as a proxy server. If you
rented a VPS or are using some other server that you have root permissions on,
then you can just enable `GatewayPorts` in `/etc/ssh/sshd\_config` and ssh
directly to that port. So if you decided to set the tunnel to use port `12345`
on `proxyhost` and you are able to enable `GatewayPorts`, then you can just type
`ssh -p 12345 you@proxyhost` and it will be as if you were SSHing directly into
the Pi. If however, you opted to use a server controlled by your school, then
there are a few more steps that must be taken.

To actually utilize the tunnel and access the Pi using a proxy server without
gateway ports enabled, there are two possible routes to take. In the first one,
we first SSH into the server being used as a proxy, and then SSH from there into
the Pi.  For example, if you choose `proxyhost` to host the tunnel on port
`12345`, you would do something like:

```console bash
you@laptop: ~$ ssh you@proxyhost
you@proxyhost's password: <Enter Password>
you@proxyhost: ~$ ssh -p 12345 you@localhost
you@localhost's password: <Enter Raspberry Pi Password>
you@raspberrypi: ~$
```

The second option is to define a proxy command in your local ssh config files to
make the process of connecting to the Pi a bit more direct. Add these lines to
the ssh config files on whichever machines you intend to remotely access the Pi
from:

```text ~/.ssh/config
Host rpi.dorm
	Proxycommand ssh you@proxyhost exec nc localhost 12345
```

What this does is tell SSH to run [netcat](http://linux.die.net/man/1/nc) on the
proxy server to bridge the connections. You'll still need your login credentials
for both the proxy and the Pi, but the connection process will seem a lot more
seamless, especially if you use pubkeys instead of passwords for access. Also,
configuring the connection like this will allow you to use other SSH features
such as scp and sftp to copy files directly between your local machine and the
Pi, instead of first having to copy them to the proxy server. So you can do `scp
somefile rpi.dorm:` and it will just work.

So now that we can access the Pi from anywhere, what are we going to do with it?
Well, I use it to send
[magic packets](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wake-on-LAN#Magic_packet) to my
desktop to power it on remotely, and for accessing files that I have stored on
the Pi using...


[Back to top ↑](#top)
###<a id="nas"></a>Network Attached Storage With an External Drive

If you use more than a single computer on a network, it can often be convenient
if you have a networked drive that they can all access, whether it's to store
your media collection, documents, or just for transferring files. Unfortunately,
dedicated devices to run this type of service are usually expensive, so as an
alternative I decided to use my Raspberry Pi to host network storage using Samba
and an extra 500G USB hard drive I had lying around.

To create this setup, first format the hard drive with a Linux file system if it
doesn't already have one, but make sure to back up anything you might want off
of it first. Next, attach it to the Pi via USB. If the drive doesn't have it's
own power supply, you may need to use a powered USB hub, since the ports on the
Pi don't seem adequate for drives that run on USB power alone. Next, create a
directory where you wish to access the drive and mount it there, like so:

``` console bash
you@raspberrypi: ~$ sudo mkdir /nas
you@raspberrypi: ~$ sudo mount /dev/sda1 /nas
```

Replace the path `/nas` to your liking, and change `/dev/sda1` to the path to
the partition you want to use.

To have it mount automatically at boot, add the following line to the bottom of
`/etc/fstab`:

``` text
/dev/sda1       /nas            ext4    exec,user,auto,rw 0       0
```
Again, be sure to change the paths if they're different on your system.

Next, we need to install Samba, a program that will allow us to host directories
as Windows share drives. Install it with `sudo apt-get install -y samba`. Once
it is done installing, cd into /etc/samba and backup the default config with
`sudo cp smb.conf smb.conf.bak`. Then open smb.conf with your editor and make
uncomment the line that says `security = user`. This will make it use your Pi
login information for accessing the network drive. Finally, go down to the
bottom of the file and add this section:

``` ini smb.conf
[pi_nas]
	comment = RPI NAS
	path = /nas
	valid users = @users
	force group = users
	create mask = 0660
	directory mask = 0771
	read only = no
```

Obviously you should replace /nas with the path to your mountpoint if you used
something different.

Once you have the configs sorted out, start/restart the samba server with `sudo
service samba restart`. You can now mount the folder as a windows share drive at
`\\<Raspberry Pi>\pi_nas` from any other computers on the network. You can then
use it to store any files you want to access from multiple devices on the
network. Personally, I used it to store some of my music collection, and as the
storage location for the next trick.

[Back to top ↑](#top)

###<a id="deluge"></a>Deluge as a Centralized Torrent Daemon

For all the bad press it gets from it's use digital piracy, BitTorrent is still
an incredibly useful technology that is used by many developers and virtually
every major Linux distribution, as well as many independent artists to
distribute their work across the internet. However, like any peer-to-peer
technology, BitTorrent is dependent on at least some of those peers actually
staying online to seed the downloads. This creates a problem for those who want
to pay it forward by seeding their completed downloads, but are not able to
leave their computer online 24/7. Fortunately for any Raspberry Pi owners, there
is a very nice cross-platform BitTorrent client called
[Deluge](http://deluge-torrent.org/) which is capable as running on the Pi as a
daemon and seeding for as long as you want it to.

**Side Note**: For all it's nice features, in my experience Deluge is not the
lightest of BitTorrent clients. It has run fine on just about every x86 computer
I've ever used it on, but on the Pi it takes noticeably longer to bring up
torrent information and quite a while to check large files, none if which is
unexpected giving the Pis much lower processing power. I chose Deluge not for
it's speed but ease of use and ability to connect to the daemon from a client
over the network. If you want a blazingly fast and lightweight client, try
looking at [rtorrent](http://libtorrent.rakshasa.no/), be be prepared to dig
through lots of documentation and forum posts getting it to work. Now, onward!

To start running deluge as a daemon on your Raspberry Pi, first install the
required packages with `sudo apt-get install deluged deluge-console`. Once they
finish installing, we'll need to set some basic options before doing the rest
from a client. First, you should start the daemon with `deluged`. Once it starts
up, set a username and password you will use to login from the client with the
following commands:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/deluge
echo "<username>:<password>:10" >> ~/.config/deluge
```

The number `10` at the end means that you will have full control over the daemon
from the client, username and password should be self explanatory. One word of
warning though, the password will remain in that file as plaintext, so if you're
the type that worries about security you should probably choose a password that
you don't normally use.

Next, we want to ensure that remote access is in fact enabled. Run the command
`deluge-console`, and once the interface loads enter the following command:

```text
config -s allow_remote True
```

You can then exit the console with `exit`, and restart the daemon with the new
config with the commands:

```bash
pkill deluged
deluged
```

So now we have a torrent daemon running that accepts remote access from client
programs. To configure it the rest of the way, you *could* edit the (rather
unfriendly) config file by hand, but I found it much easier to set the options I
wanted by using the GUI on the client program. If you haven't already, you
should install deluge on your local machine via whatever package manager your
disto uses, or if you're on Windows or Mac, download the appropriate
[installer](http://dev.deluge-torrent.org/wiki/Download). Once you have it
installed, start the program and open `Preferences=>Interface`, and ensure that
Classic Mode is unchecked. Restart the program and this time click on
`Connection Manager=>Add`, enter the servers IP address and the username and
password you set earlier, and click `Add` and `Connect`. Once a connection is
established you can click on `Preferences` once again, only now it will change
the settings on the server running on the Pi.

From here on out the configuration of the Deluge server via the GUI is pretty
straight forward, but there are some suggestions I would give on where to start.
The first thing that should be changed is the default download location in the
`Downloads` tab. If you followed my guide above to setup an external hard drive
for NAS, I'd recommend setting it to somewhere in that directory so that you can
access the downloaded files over the network. If not, just be sure to set the
location to somewhere with enough space to handle the downloads, preferably an
external drive of some sort.  You can also set a separate
directory to move the completed downloads to if you want to keep in progress and
finished downloads separate. Finally, whether using a NAS setup or not, I would
advise setting a directory to load .torrents from. If you are mounting a
directory as NAS, then you can create a subdirectory and have Deluge watch it
for torrents, so that all you need to do is drop them there from any other
device to initiate a download. If you're not using NAS, simply set it to
anywhere that is convenient, and it will still come in handy as a way to add
torrents directly on the Pi by `wget`ing the torrent files into that directory.

[Back to top ↑](#top)

###Conclusion
So now we have a Raspberry Pi that will create a reverse SSH tunnel to be
accessed from anywhere, provide network attached storage to all local devices,
and act as a central torrent server. Not bad for $35 + spare parts. If you have
any questions about any of these steps or have a cool trick of your own, leave a
comment bellow and I'll see about adding it to these tips. Otherwise, enjoy your
new mini dorm command center.
